JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
an epic battle on Capitol Hill.
We hear from
two high-ranking senators about
the fight
over nominating Justice Antonin
Scalia's successor.
GWEN IFILL: Also ahead this
Wednesday: Apple
opposes a judge's order to
unlock the iPhone
used by the San Bernardino
shooters, saying
the ruling would undermine
customers' privacy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And:
ADRIAAN VLOK, Former South
African Minister
of Law and Order: I am guilty. I
am sorry.
Will you please forgive me?
JUDY WOODRUFF: A story of
reconciliation:
how an apartheid-era police
official is now
helping the people he once
brutalized.
DINAH SEKESE, Volunteer Relief
Worker: And
they say, can you believe
Adriaan Vlok can
change? I said, I believe what I
saw. What
I see is what I believe, and
then I am ready
to tell that Adriaan Vlok has
changed.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more on
tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: Turkey's capital
city is alive
with fear and anger tonight,
after a car bomb
killed at least 28 people and
wounded 61.
We have a report on the blast in
central Ankara,
from Juliet Bremner of
Independent Television
News.
JULIET BREMNER: Moments after an
explosion
was heard across the Turkish
capital, flames
leapt into the night sky. The
bomb had hit
a convoy of military buses that
had been taking
soldiers home from their
barracks.
In the chaos immediately after
the attack,
the governor said that he
believed the bomb
had been left in a car. It was
rush hour.
Commuters broke their journey
home to try
and help move a parked car that
was blocking
the emergency services. Unable
to access the
vehicle, they smashed in through
the window
and drove it away.
The buses were targeted close to
the Turkish
Parliament. The prime minister,
president,
and security minister were in
the middle of
a security meeting about Syria
when the bomb
went off. This is the fourth
terrorist attack
on Turkey in recent months.
Last October, more than 100
peace activists
were killed during a rally in
Ankara. On that
occasion, the so-called Islamic
State were
blamed. On this occasion, early
indications
suggest it could be the work of
the Kurdish
separatist group the PKK,
striking at the
heart of Turkey days after their
army had
hit Kurds across the Syrian
border.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And in Syria
today, convoys
carrying humanitarian aid made
their way to
besieged parts of the country.
It is part
of an agreement between the
Assad government
and the U.N. One convoy arrived
in Madaya,
a town west of Damascus that has
been sealed
off by government forces for
months. Locals
say dozens of people have
starved to death.
GWEN IFILL: Pope Francis spent
this final
day of his visit to Mexico near
the U.S. border.
He journeyed to Ciudad Juarez,
just across
the Rio Grande from El Paso,
Texas, and once
a cauldron of violence and drug
trafficking.
The pontiff's first stop was at
a prison,
where he embraced inmates and
preached a message
of redemption.
POPE FRANCIS, Leader of Catholic
Church (through
translator): The one who has
suffered the
greatest pain, and we could say
has experienced
hell, can become a prophet in
society. Work,
so that this society, which uses
people and
discards them, will not go on
claiming victims.
GWEN IFILL: The final event of
the papal trip
was a huge outdoor mass this
evening.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tensions in the
South China
Sea escalated today, as U.S. and
Taiwan officials
confirmed that China has
deployed advanced
surface-to-air missiles on a
disputed island.
The batteries are on Woody
Island in the Paracels
claimed by Taiwan and Vietnam,
but controlled
by Beijing.
WANG YI, Chinese Foreign
Minister (through
translator): China's move of
setting up limited,
necessary and self-defense
facilities on the
islands and reefs where Chinese
troops are
stationed is in line with the
right of self-defense
endowed by international law to
any sovereign
state. Therefore, there is
nothing wrong about
it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But the United
States sharply
criticized the move.
Secretary of State John Kerry
spoke in Washington
as he met with Poland's foreign
minister.
JOHN KERRY, U.S. Secretary of
State: When
President Xi was here in
Washington, he stood
in the Rose Garden with
President Obama and
said China will not militarize
in the South
China Sea. But there is every
evidence, every
day, that there has been an
increase of militarization
of one kind or another. It's of
serious concern.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The news came
just a day after
President Obama called for a
peaceful resolution
of disputes in the South China
Sea.
GWEN IFILL: Iran pushed back
today against
a proposal to limit supply and
boost prices.
Russia, Saudi Arabia, Venezuela
and Qatar
said yesterday they would cap
oil output at
January levels if other major
producers do
likewise. But Iran said today
that, with international
sanctions easing, it will
increase oil exports.
It called for the other
producers to pump
less.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Despite Iran's
statement, the
price of oil traded higher
today, and that
kept Wall Street's rally alive.
The Dow Jones
industrial average gained 257
points to close
near 16454. The Nasdaq rose 98
points, and
the S&P 500 added 31.
GWEN IFILL: And there's a new
top dog in the
land. A German shorthaired
pointer named C.J.
took best in show last night at
the Westminster
Dog Show in New York. The
3-year-old champion
beat 2,700 canine competitors
over two days.
He's only been showing for six
months, but
he has already won 18 best in
show awards,
culminating at Westminster.
Go for C.J.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
top senators
weigh in on the next Supreme
Court nominee;
should Apple grant law
enforcement access
to iPhone data?; political
charges and countercharges
fly in South Carolina; and much
more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The passing of
Justice Antonin
Scalia has unleashed a political
battle of
epic proportions that is
reverberating from
the campaign trail to Capitol
Hill. President
Obama has made it clear he will
nominate someone.
But, in the Senate, most
Republicans say he
shouldn't, and, if he does, they
won't confirm.
We hear now from two senior
members of the
Senate Judiciary Committee,
which first considers
any nominee.
First up, Democratic Senator
Dianne Feinstein
of California. She joins us from
San Francisco.
Welcome, Senator Feinstein.
So, what is your response to
your Republican
colleagues who say this should
be left to
the next president?
SEN. DIANNE FEINSTEIN (D),
California: Well,
I would say this, Judy.
Fourteen nominees have been
confirmed in the
final year of a presidency in
history. And,
as a matter of fact, Ronald
Reagan presented
Judge Kennedy to become Justice
Kennedy, and
he became that and was confirmed
in the last
year of Reagan's administration.
So, it is a well-established
fact that this
can happen. I mean, I remember
back. One of
my very first confirmation
hearings was Justice
Ginsburg. And both the chairman
of the committee
today, Senator Grassley and
Senator Hatch,
voted for her. And I remember
their statements
to this day about a president
being entitled
to his nominees, provided they
were qualified,
provided they had the requisite
skills, the
integrity, the moral compass to
be enacted.
And they both voted for Justice
Ginsburg.
I wish we could go back to those
days, because
what's happening now is very
destructive of
the process.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me just
cite quickly
what Senator Hatch has said. And
I'm going
to be talking to him in just a
minute. He
said the Senate has never
allowed a term-limited
president to nominate someone
this late in
his term.
SEN. DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Well, the
record reflects
that 14 have been confirmed in
the final year.
We're well able to do it in the
time that
remains.
Now, why not do it? Because what
is left are
several very important cases,
whereby, if
there is a tie vote, the
appellate court decision
takes precedence, therefore,
shorting the
justice system for whoever it
was that was
on the other side of the
appellate court decision.
And we shouldn't do that. That,
I think, is
destructive to what is, you
know, a very well-put-together
system of justice.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just quickly, two
other questions.
Republicans say it was the
Democrats who politicized
this process with the way they
went after
Robert Bork, the way they went
after Clarence
Thomas, that the Democrats
started this.
SEN. DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Yes,
well, I wasn't
here then, so I really can't
comment.
But whoever it was, it seems to
me the time
has come to end it. And I had
hoped that we
were in the process of ending
it. We have
confirmed 11 judges last year.
We have 78
pending. And it shouldn't be
that way. And,
you know, Barack Obama has
almost a full year
left. Are you saying then that
his hands could
be -- should be handcuffed and
that he can't
make appointments in that full
year of his
presidency?
I think that's a mistake. And
one thing, one
more thing. What goes around
comes around.
And I re-read Orrin Hatch's
statement after
the Ginsburg hearing. And
regardless of what
has happened since then, I think
he was absolutely
right.
And so the ability to process a
nominee becomes
very important and I think very
significant.
And I would hope that Orrin
would remember
that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, Senator
Feinstein,
how far to the center should the
president
lean in choosing a nominee?
Should he try
hard to find somebody who is
going to appeal
to Republicans, as well as
Democrats?
SEN. DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Well, I
think the answer
to that question is yes, if you
want to get
someone confirmed, I think
somebody that has
gone through the confirmation
process -- and
there are several who are
well-qualified on
that score -- or somebody that
would be seen
as outstanding by both sides of
the aisle.
And if either one of those were
to happen,
I think the chances of
confirmation would
be very high.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator Dianne
Feinstein joining
us from California, we thank
you.
SEN. DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Thank
you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now to a
Republican view,
Senator Orrin Hatch of Utah.
He's also on
the Judiciary Committee, and he
joins us from
Salt Lake City.
Welcome, Senator Hatch. So the
Republicans
are in the majority. The
president has said
he is going to nominate someone
to fill the
term or to take the place of
Justice Scalia.
What is going to happen then?
SEN. ORRIN HATCH (R), Utah:
Well, the president
has an absolute right to
nominate whoever
he wants to. And I would vote to
protect that
right.
But the Senate also has an
absolute right
to confirm or not to confirm.
And so I do
support Senator McConnell in
saying, but,
look, let's get it out of this
terrible presidential
brouhaha that is going on, and
let's get it
over to the next year, and be
fair to both
sides, because what would happen
is whoever
wins the presidency is going to
be able to
make this nomination.
Usually, you never nominate
anyone during
the last year of a president.
And the reason
for that is because -- well,
there are many
reasons, but one reason is
because there's
always a very contested Senate
primaries and
also election, and, secondly,
generally, one
side or the other is going to
get very, very
upset about it.
I would rather get the Supreme
Court out of
that type of a condition.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we just
heard Senator
Feinstein say that there are now
14 examples
of nominations to the Supreme
Court that took
place during the final year of a
presidency.
SEN. ORRIN HATCH: Well, in the
last 80 years,
there haven't been. And I'm
talking about
80 years, and except for --
except for Justice
Kennedy. But Kennedy was
nominated in the
prior year. And that was only
after a bruising
set of fights that resulted in
basically a
choice of Kennedy that both
sides went along
with.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me just
come back
to you with what not only
Senator Feinstein
has said, but so many others,
including the
president.
He still has almost a year left
in office,
that it is the duty of the
Senate to consider
the nomination. Senator
Feinstein pointed
out that when you supported Ruth
Bader Ginsburg
for the Senate, who clearly was
someone whose
views were different from yours,
you said
the president...
SEN. ORRIN HATCH: That's right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: ... should --
choice should
be respected.
SEN. ORRIN HATCH: Well, I think
the president's
choice should be respected. That
doesn't mean
you have to have -- you have to
accept that
choice.
And, in this situation, just
think about it.
They are already voting in the
primaries.
We're already in full swing in
the presidential
election, at least the
primaries. It's contentious
as can be. It's the most
obnoxious political
system, series of problems that
I have seen
in the whole time I have been in
the United
States Senate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator, are you
saying that
-- then that the majority of
Republican would
not hold hearings on the
Judiciary Committee?
SEN. ORRIN HATCH: Well, I think
if you are
not going to allow it to come up
in this brouhaha
year, where there's all kinds of
infighting
and screaming and shouting, yes,
I don't think
any reason -- there wouldn't be
any real good
reason to have hearings.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And is there any
precedent
for that, for the Senate ever
having refused
to consider the president's
nominee to the
Supreme Court?
SEN. ORRIN HATCH: Well, I don't
know about
that, whether there is any
precedent.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I mean, when the
president
himself didn't withdraw the
nomination.
SEN. ORRIN HATCH: Well, we're
talking about
Nino Scalia. We're talking about
his successor.
We're talking about something
that every Republican
-- person, every Republican
revered and many
Democrats revered, by the way,
because they
knew what a great jurist he
really was. And
we're talking about having a
system that doesn't
become the brutalized system
that occurred
in the Bob Bork nomination, one
of the greatest
legal minds in the history of
this country,
and they just brutalized him.
And then look at what they did
to Clarence
Thomas. The fact of the matter
is, I would
like to get it out of that type
of brouhaha,
and get it into the next year,
where there
should be no brouhaha, and
whoever is president
should be able to pick whoever
that president
wants.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you are
saying, just to
be clear, Republicans would sit
on this nomination,
not act on it?
SEN. ORRIN HATCH: Well, I'm
saying the Republicans
shouldn't act on it, because the
proper way
is to get this done in a way
that cools the
whole process around electing
judges, and
in particular justices to the
United States
Supreme Court.
I just don't want the court
politicized. And
this would be the biggest
politicization the
court in history. And that is
saying something,
because there have been some
other times that
certainly would come close to
matching this.
But, in all honesty, I just
don't want to
see the court denigrated any
further than
it would be in this very caustic
election
year with the way things are
going right now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Even with a
centrist choice?
SEN. ORRIN HATCH: Well, who
knows whether
it will be centrist or not. We
will have to
see.
Yes, the president might pick
somebody that
everybody can agree with. That's
another matter.
I hope he does.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator Orrin
Hatch, we thank
you very much.
SEN. ORRIN HATCH: Well, thank
you.
GWEN IFILL: The battle over
privacy vs. security
is back front and center, as
Apple digs in
against the FBI and the courts
over the issue
of access to data on its phones.
December 2, 2015, that's the day
Syed Farook
and his wife, Tashfeen Malik,
went on a murderous
rampage in San Bernardino,
California, killing
14 people. Hours later, they
were, in turn,
killed by police. Ever since,
the FBI has
been trying to read the contents
of a cell
phone Farook used.
JAMES COMEY, FBI Director: We
still have one
of those killers' phones that we
have not
been able to open. And it's been
over two
months now. We're still working
on it.
GWEN IFILL: Last week, FBI
Director James
Comey told a Senate hearing that
the Apple
iPhone's encryption has made it
impossible
for the agency to access its
content.
Now a federal judge in
California has ordered
the company to create software
that will do
just that. But Apple CEO Tim
Cook forcefully
rejected that order early
yesterday, writing
in a letter addressed to Apple
customers:
"In the wrong hands, this
software, which
doesn't exist today, would have
the potential
to unlock any iPhone in
someone's physical
possession."
White House Press Secretary Josh
Earnest disputed
that, saying the government
wants access only
to the single device associated
with Farook.
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary:
We're not asking Apple to
redesign its products
or to create a new back door to
its products.
This is a much more specific
request that
the Department of Justice has
put forward.
GWEN IFILL: Apple stepped up its
protections
after NSA leaker Edward Snowden
exposed government
surveillance of phone traffic in
2013.
One feature can even erase the
iPhone's contents
after 10 failed attempts to
unlock it. Prosecutors
say they are worried that this
feature could
be on the phone Farook used. And
unless Apple
devises a way to unlock it, they
could lose
all its data. The company now
has five days
to make its formal response in
court.
Now for a look at the wider
stakes surrounding
this case, we turn to Nate
Cardozo, a staff
attorney who focuses on digital
civil liberties
for the Electronic Frontier
Foundation. He
joins us from San Francisco. And
Stewart Baker,
former assistant secretary of
homeland security
under George W. Bush
administration and former
general counsel at the National
Security Agency.
He's now in private practice at
Steptoe & Johnson.
Stewart Baker, Tim Cook says
that building
this access, this back door
access to the
iPhone, as he describes it,
would permanently
weaken privacy. Is he right?
STEWART BAKER, Former General
Counsel, National
Security Agency: No, I don't
think he is.
The order says you must defeat
this one security
feature, which is the automatic
erasing of
all the information on the
phone. And that's
not building a permanent back
door into anything.
That's one phone, one order, one
security
feature.
GWEN IFILL: So, Nate Cardozo, if
it's just
one phone, one order, one
security feature,
what is the huzzah all about?
NATE CARDOZO, Electronic
Frontier Foundation:
Well, it's not about one phone
and it's not
about one security feature.
The FBI chose this case to get
the precedent,
right? We know who the shooters
were. We know
who they were talking to. The
FBI already
has the metadata. They chose
this case because
they want precedent that they
can order a
company to design a particular
feature at
their whim.
So, when you hear Stewart or the
White House
press secretary say it's only
this one phone,
that is simply disingenuous.
GWEN IFILL: Well, are we talking
about precedent
here, Stewart Baker?
STEWART BAKER: Well, there is
longstanding
precedent, 200 years old, that
says that if
someone has an obligation to
help law enforcement
to take action, then the
government can order
other people to help that person
carry out
his obligation.
If somebody jumps into a cab and
says there
is a bank robber up ahead,
follow that car,
the phone -- the cab company has
an obligation
to follow that cab.
GWEN IFILL: What is the
government standing
to make such a request like
this?
STEWART BAKER: So, there is an
All Writs Act
that has been around for almost
200 years
that says that essentially the
government
can ask someone who is in a
uniquely -- unique
position to help to assist in
carrying out
an obligation that law
enforcement has.
GWEN IFILL: Nate Cardozo, what
slippery slope
do you envision here?
NATE CARDOZO: Well, it is more
than a slippery
slope.
Stewart, as you well know, no
court in the
United States has ever approved
an order of
this breadth under the All Writs
Act. No court
has ever ordered an American
company to compromise
the security of all of their
customers. No
court has ever ordered a safe
maker to make
a master key.
And the courts that have
addressed it, the
Inray (ph), the company, case
that, I'm sure,
Stewart, you are aware of, the
court found
that OnStar could not be ordered
to subvert
its emergency phone system and
turn it into
a wiretap act.
(CROSSTALK)
NATE CARDOZO: This isn't just --
this isn't
just a slippery slope. If the
FBI is permitted
to get the order in this case,
that is it.
They will be permitted to get a
back door
order in every case going
forward.
And more than that, Apple will
be unable to
resist identical demands from
China, from
India, from Russia. And that is
the end of
secure devices.
STEWART BAKER: I have to say
that the concern
here that Apple has is, they
have said this
phone cannot be cracked. And now
it turns
out that may not be true. And
they would like
to suppress that possibility,
because they're
afraid China or Russia might
order them to
use that capability.
China and Russia are perfectly
capable of
ordering Apple to do that
tomorrow, whether
they have help from a court in
this case or
not.
GWEN IFILL: You talk about China
and Russia.
And I want to ask you both this.
How -- since
you brought it up -- which is,
how do international
actors see this kind of
discussion that we're
having here? Does it make us
look weak?
(CROSSTALK)
NATE CARDOZO: I think
authoritarian regimes
around the world are salivating
at the prospect
of the FBI winning this order.
If Apple creates the master key
that the FBI
has demanded that they create,
governments
around the world are going to be
demanding
exactly the same access.
STEWART BAKER: Whether or not
they do that
in response to this order, if
it's possible
to build that capability, then
the Russians
and the Chinese are going to
order Apple to
do it sooner or later, and
probably sooner,
whether or not the United States
tells Apple
to do this.
GWEN IFILL: Can I ask you both
to be -- to
make one thing clear? Do you
both agree that
Apple is capable of doing what
they are being
asked to do and they're just
resisting it
on principle, Nate Cardozo?
NATE CARDOZO: We think that
Apple is capable
of doing it for this generation
of phone.
The phone at issue is an iPhone
5c, which
I guess is two generations back
at this point.
The iPhone 6 and the iPhone 6s,
it is our
belief that Apple is probably
not capable,
at least not capable of using
this exact technique
to unlock.
But we think they are capable of
unlocking
the 5c.
GWEN IFILL: And you think that
is true, Stewart
Baker?
STEWART BAKER: That is what it
appears from
what Apple has said, that they
think they
can do it. They choose not to do
it, notwithstanding
the stakes for terrorism in San
Bernardino.
GWEN IFILL: So, if you are the
owner of one
of these phones which could be
unlocked if
Apple decided to go along with
this, how much
do -- how worried should you be,
Nate Cardozo,
that your privacy is about to be
compromised?
NATE CARDOZO: Well, you know,
every individual
should create, should do their
own threat
assessment.
If you have particularly
sensitive data, if
you are a human rights worker in
Syria, if
you are an LGBT activist in any
country around
the world where you may be
persecuted for
your orientation or beliefs,
make sure to
tune up your security in
response to this.
Use a pass code longer than four
digits.
GWEN IFILL: Well, I hope that
everyone is
doing that anyway.
Stewart Baker?
STEWART BAKER: Yes, I --
certainly there are
times when everyone wants to
worry about security.
But the idea that the desire for
security
could trump a lawfully obtained
search warrant
to find out whether we're at
risk of other
people who conspired with the
San Bernardino
shooters right now strikes me as
odd.
And for Apple to say well, it
interferes with
our business model and our
consumer trust
to help the U.S. government find
out about
this possible additional
attacker doesn't
make any sense.
GWEN IFILL: This security vs.
privacy argument,
it sounds to me like it is just
going to continue,
Nate Cardozo
NATE CARDOZO: You know, it's not
security
vs. privacy. This is security
vs. surveillance.
This is security vs. security.
Before Apple instituted this
level of encryption
on devices, when devices were
stolen, they
were susceptible to any
run-of-the-mill hacker
opening it up. And that is what
the FBI wants
Apple to return to? That's
crazy.
GWEN IFILL: OK. Well, we're
going to have
to leave it there for now.
Nate Cardozo of the Electronic
Frontier Foundation,
and Stewart Baker, former deputy
assistant
secretary at Department of
Homeland Security,
thank you both.
STEWART BAKER: Thanks.
NATE CARDOZO: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
notorious apartheid
leader seeks penance for his
wrongs; and the
man who composed the music for
the movie "Carol"
scores his first Oscar
nomination.
But, first, in the race for the
White House,
tensions are heating up in South
Carolina.
Our political director, Lisa
Desjardins, reports.
LISA DESJARDINS: The Republican
2016 race,
already full of twists and
turns, took one
more today, when South Carolina
Governor Nikki
Haley announced she is endorsing
Marco Rubio,
four days before the state's
primary.
Otherwise, the contest has
become a blur of
blistering attacks, starting
with the man
at the top, Donald Trump,
target, Ted Cruz.
Cruz has said that Trump is not
truly conservative.
Cruz has a series of anti-Trump
ads that make
the point.
Today, in Bluffton, South
Carolina, Trump
again shot back.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
You can't lie about people like
that. It's
just incredible. And, again, I
have been in
business and I have dealt with
some pretty
rough hombres, much tougher than
Cruz. But
I have never dealt with anybody
that lied
so much.
LISA DESJARDINS: As for Cruz,
consider it
the third law of politics. Every
Trump attack
gets an equal and opposite
counterattack.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
Look, ethics matter.
LISA DESJARDINS: Today, the
Texas senator
went after Trump's attempt to
block his ads.
SEN. TED CRUZ: Mr. Trump has
sent me a legal
cease and desist letter saying,
stop telling
the voters my record. Now, that
is, objectively,
legally frivolous.
LISA DESJARDINS: But this is not
a two-man
war, and Cruz is also targeting
fellow Senator
Marco Rubio.
SEN. TED CRUZ: When you have
Donald Trump
and Marco Rubio repeatedly
putting forth fabrications
with no evidence, no basis
whatsoever, just
trying to throw mud and attack.
LISA DESJARDINS: Rubio is more
focused in
his attacks on fellow Senator
Cruz and defense
spending.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO (R-FL),
Presidential Candidate:
Some people talk to me, and say,
well, why
vote for you and not Ted Cruz?
Well, Ted Cruz
voted for a budget that cut it
even more.
I'm not cutting defense spending
when I'm
president.
LISA DESJARDINS: Jeb Bush may
not be in the
top three right now, but he is
not to be left
out, firing away in Beaufort
today at Trump,
Rubio and John Kasich.
JEB BUSH (R), Presidential
Candidate: With
all due respect, Senator Rubio,
your four
years or five years or whatever
it is as senator
does not match up to my
capabilities of understanding
how the world works.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JEB BUSH: Donald Trump says we
don't need
to spend more money on the
military. And John
Kasich has a similar kind of
view. They're
wrong.
LISA DESJARDINS: Kasich, he kept
his distance
from the scrimmage, hoping a
positive message
wins.
GOV. JOHN KASICH (R-OH),
Presidential Candidate:
Let's not be negative about the
future of
our country or negative about
our country
today. We're doing fine.
LISA DESJARDINS: The Democrats
were less sharp-edged.
But Hillary Clinton, in Chicago,
did seem
to dig at her rival, Bernie
Sanders.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
We need a president, yes, who is
passionate
about getting, as much as
possible, money
out of politics and reining in
Wall Street,
but we need a president who is
passionate
about creating jobs and raising
incomes, like
I am.
LISA DESJARDINS: Sanders left
the campaign
trail briefly today, returning
to Vermont.
Up next? Candidates in both
parties hit national
television for town halls the
next two nights.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just three days
away from the
next voting contests, we turn
our attention
to Nevada, where Sanders and
Clinton will
face off for the third time, as
well as South
Carolina, which we just heard
about.
Joining us tonight from Las
Vegas is Jon Ralston
of "Ralston Live," and from
South Carolina,
Randy Covington. He's a
professor of journalism
at the University of South
Carolina. He is
also the former news director of
WIS Television
in Columbia.
Gentlemen, welcome to you both.
Let's start with the Democrats
and Nevada.
Jon Ralston, the race has
tightened up there
between Clinton and Sanders.
What has happened?
Why?
JON RALSTON, "Ralston Live":
Well, Hillary
Clinton had the state locked up.
She came
here early last year, set up an
infrastructure,
hired all these operatives from
2008 who had
worked here. She reached out to
the Latino
community. Bernie Sanders was
invisible here.
His campaign didn't even arrive
until late
last year, but then slowly the
tide began
turning.
He started to turn. He raised a
lot of money,
put resources in here, spent
money on TV.
And then after New Hampshire,
Judy, the tide
completely turned, when she lost
by a landslide
in New Hampshire. Her internal
polls showed
she was hemorrhaging. Suddenly,
the Clintons
were making New Hampshire and
Iowa seem like
Nevada, when it is nothing like
Nevada. They
said it was an all-white state,
essentially.
And so her campaign essentially
has been in
a freefall here. They have been
trying to
stop that. And they're hoping to
have a parachute
before they hit the ground on
Saturday.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just quickly,
Jon Ralston,
Hillary Clinton had shown
strength among Latino
voters. We know she had some
strength among
the labor unions. What has
happened to all
of that?
JON RALSTON: Well, she does have
strength
among Latino voters here, Judy.
In fact, she
has had some high-profile
endorsements. She
has Dolores Huerta, the
legendary civil rights
activist, campaigning for her
here today.
Henry Cisneros, the former
Cabinet secretary,
mayor of San Antonio, was here.
She has a
lot of local dreamers, including
maybe the
most famous dreamer in the
country who was
on stage with President Obama.
Astrid Silva
has endorsed her.
But Bernie Sanders has made
inroads. Even
her -- even the Clinton campaign
acknowledges
that Sanders' message is
starting to resonate
in the Latino community. So, I
think she will
win Latinos, but will she win by
enough to
win the caucus on Saturday?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Randy Covington,
let's turn
to the Democrats in South
Carolina, where
Hillary Clinton seems to be
holding onto her
lead a little better. What does
it look like?
RANDY COVINGTON, University of
South Carolina:
For the Democrats, there is not
the passion
that existed eight years ago
when Barack Obama
was running.
Most African-American leaders
here are supporting
Clinton. The Sanders message is
fairly alien
in a conservative state. I think
it's fairly
safe for Hillary Clinton here.
More of the
focus, more of the excitement is
on the other
side.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It sure is. And
that's where
all the -- as we saw in that
report from Lisa
Desjardins, that is where a lot
of the yelling
and the TV spots are directed.
Randy Covington, why is Donald
Trump doing
so well in South Carolina?
RANDY COVINGTON: Well, South
Carolina has
a long history of being
contrarian.
The Civil War started here. When
the civil
rights legislation passed in the
1960s, we
raised the Confederate Flag on
top of the
statehouse. His message
resonates in a state
like this. And at a time in the
nation where
there is frustration over
government, clearly,
Trump has tapped into that. And
in a state
that four years ago in this
primary went for
Newt Gingrich, I don't think
there is anything
surprising about Trump's
strength.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what about,
though, the
message from Ted Cruz? And we
know that he
and Trump are in a vicious back
and forth.
Who is listening, who is
responding positively
to Ted Cruz?
RANDY COVINGTON: All right, so,
Judy, if I
could turn the clock back, 16
years, you were
at CNN. I was working in
television at that
time.
And John McCain and the Straight
Talk Express
came rolling into South
Carolina. And then
things got really interesting.
And I think
we're at this exact same moment
today. You
have the apparent front-runners.
However,
it is much more nuanced and
complicated than
that.
Jeb Bush, this is his last
stand. And he is
putting enormous strength,
power, resources
into this.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, meanwhile,
if I could
interrupt, you -- I was going to
say, you
had your governor, Nikki Haley,
today endorsing
Marco Rubio, which is mixing
things...
RANDY COVINGTON: Sure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Does that help
him a lot?
RANDY COVINGTON: Absolutely.
So, you have Bush, who I think
is ascendant,
strong debate performance. You
have Rubio.
Just a few minutes ago, the
influential State
newspaper here in Columbia
endorsed Kasich.
So, I think this field is very
much in play.
Probably, most people expect the
insurgent
message of Trump to win. But
everything else
is very volatile. Where I live,
every day,
my phone rings incessantly with
robo-calls.
I brought in my props. This is
from my mailbox
in the last two days, three
pro-Jeb, one anti-Jeb,
one anti-Trump, two anti-Rubio,
one pro-Rubio.
Well, I think there is much more
to unfold
in the next few hours.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It sounds like,
and in the
next few days.
But, meanwhile, back to Nevada
and Jon Ralston.
The Republicans are competing
there one week
later. How is that shaping up,
or is everything
on hold until they see how South
Carolina
goes?
JON RALSTON: Well, they're
waiting to come
here until after South Carolina,
Judy.
But Donald Trump is dominating
here in the
polls. The other campaigns that
are organized
here, Cruz, Bush and Rubio, all
privately
acknowledge they're fighting for
second place,
but that could be important,
depending on
what happens in South Carolina.
But I think Nevada is going to
mirror what
is happening elsewhere, that as
long as there
are three or four candidates
running against
Donald Trump, he will get his
25, 30, 35 percent
and the rest are going to divide
it up, until
someone decides to get out or a
couple of
them decide to get out.
It will be interesting to see
what happens
in South Carolina, because I
think that will
have an impact on Nevada, but
probably only
on who finishes in second and
third.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One thing is for
sure. It's
not dull.
Jon Ralston, Randy Covington,
thank you both.
GWEN IFILL: A generation has
passed since
South Africa ended apartheid.
And while the
country has made progress
towards reconciling
years of state-sanctioned,
violent oppression,
the reckoning continues.
At the same time, there have
been smaller,
individual efforts to do
penance.
Tonight, special correspondent
Martin Seemungal
brings us the story of a man who
was once
the very symbol of apartheid, as
he tries
to make amends.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: It is an
unusual scene in
South Africa, a white man in his
late '70s
in a black township delivering
free food to
the needy.
But it's not just what the man
is doing. It's
who the man is or, who he was.
His name is
Adriaan Vlok, and he was a
cabinet minister
during the harshest years of
apartheid, known
as a ruthless defender of white
minority rule
over the black majority.
MONDLI MAKHANYA, City Press:
Adriaan Vlok
was the manifestation of the
evil that the
apartheid regime was. And he was
the worst
of the worst.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: Mondli
Makhanya was an anti-apartheid
activist then. Today, he is an
outspoken editorial
writer for a Johannesburg
newspaper.
MONDLI MAKHANYA: From the
mid-1980s, I would
venture to say, other than
President P.W.
Botha at the time, he was the
most evil man
in South Africa, and he was the
face of the
evil of the apartheid regime.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: As minister of
law and order,
Vlok was responsible for the
police, the shock
troops in the war against black
activists
fighting apartheid. A bloody,
violent fight,
thousands were killed. Tens of
thousands were
detained, locked up without
trial, all under
the watch of Adriaan Vlok.
Adriaan Vlok, Former South
African Minister
of Law and Order: Hello.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: Three decades
later now,
in the black township of
Olievenhoutbosch,
Vlok passes unrecognized as he
does his rounds.
Vlok visits this township every
week, delivering
food donated by local
supermarkets to three
day care centers and a charity
for the disabled.
He is reaching out to the people
he once helped
oppress to atone for what he
calls the sin
of apartheid.
Vlok has always been a devout
Christian, but
in the early years, he believed
in white superiority.
His transformation began after
the fall of
apartheid and the first all-race
elections.
Over a period of about 10 years,
he began
to rethink and ultimately
repent.
ADRIAAN VLOK: I told about my
sins. I submitted
to the lord and said, lord, I
have sinned.
Here I am. Please forgive me.
I am not offering any excuses. I
cannot offer
an excuse that this and this
were the reason
why I did that. I am -- I am
guilty. I am
sorry. Will you please forgive
me?
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: So, his
mission today is
about redemption. It's about
reconciliation.
Forty-three-year-old Dinah
Sekese runs the
disabled center Vlok is helping.
As an 18-year-old,
she joined the protests against
the apartheid
regime. She knew who he was.
DINAH SEKESE, Volunteer Relief
Worker: I know
the man was -- that Adriaan
Vlok, for me,
was a bad man.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: In the several
years she
has worked with Vlok, she never
showed him
the scars from the rubber
bullets fired by
his police in 1986, but, on this
day, she
did. She told him it happened
during a march
on a police station.
DINAH SEKESE: Stones go...
ADRIAAN VLOK: From behind you.
DINAH SEKESE: ... over me. And I
was like
-- and then I hear pop, pop,
pop, pop, in
the front. And almost eight
rubber bullets
hit me. My arms, or you can see
all over,
here.
ADRIAAN VLOK: I can't take away
that scar,
but I can love her and I can
help her.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: Painful
memories for Dinah,
poignantly ironic that Adriaan
Vlok is the
one offering comfort.
Obviously, they were police
under your ultimate
command.
ADRIAAN VLOK: Yes. Yes. I feel
bad. I didn't
feel good about that. I feel
sorry that this
has happened. And, as I said, I
can't take
away their scars. They are
there. They are
there as a witness to what we
did to these
people.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: The most
infamous case linked
to Vlok was the attempt to
assassinate Frank
Chikane.
Reverend Frank Chikane was a key
member of
the anti-apartheid leadership.
In the late
'80s, the apartheid government
saw him as
a significant threat.
Did you give the instruction to
kill Frank
Chikane? Or was that -- how did
that come
about? Who made that decision?
ADRIAAN VLOK: His name was put
before me,
and I said there is an
instruction that you
could consider killing him. And
I said, do
it, so I pass it on.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: Vlok says he
didn't know
how or when it would be done. In
1989, Chikane's
clothes were laced with poison.
He barely
survived.
In 2006, Vlok confessed to his
involvement
in and was given a 10-year
suspended sentence.
But he wanted to do more, an act
to underscore
his sincerity. In a private
meeting with Chikane,
he offered to wash his feet.
Vlok admits he
was afraid.
ADRIAAN VLOK: I have been a guy
in this country
who had power. I was a minister.
And I am
Afrikaans-speaking, and I am a
white man.
And here I am going to bow down
on my knees
in front of a black man.
And I stuttered. And I asked him
the question,
"Will you please allow me to
wash your feet?"
And he was taken aback. He said,
"But why
do you want to do that?"
And then we talk a little bit. I
said, "Frank,
I believe that I have hurt you
through apartheid
and through what we did to you
and your family."
He said to me, "OK, you can wash
my feet."
And I cried. And I think Frank
cried. And
he prayed, and I prayed.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: The people who
work with
Vlok in the township do not
doubt his sincerity.
DINAH SEKESE: And they say, can
you believe
Adriaan Vlok can change? I said,
I believe
what I saw. What I see is what I
believe,
and then I am ready to tell that
Adriaan Vlok
has changed.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: And they
believe he should
be forgiven.
DINAH SEKESE: Here in our
country, the only
thing that we appreciate is when
a person
comes out and says, sorry. Can
you please
forgive me? It's what we want.
And I believe
it's something that builds this
peace that
we have in this country.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: But Mondli
Makhanya says
there is still enormous
bitterness among black
South Africans because of the
crimes committed
by the apartheid regime. Not
everyone is willing
to forgive so easily.
MONDLI MAKHANYA: Ideally, people
like Adriaan
Vlok should have gone to prison
for a very
long time. But it was necessary,
in the wisdom
of Mandela, that, actually, we
make those
compromises. But forgiveness
comes hard.
ADRIAAN VLOK: I think it is of
the utmost
importance, because if you are
not prepared
to forgive and to be reconciled,
what is the
-- what is the alternative? It
is hatred,
I blame you, they blame me, and
we will not
find each other.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: A scene like
this would
have been unimaginable 30 years
ago, South
Africa's most feared apartheid
minister embracing
young black children singing the
national
anthem.
Adriaan Vlok says he will
dedicate his remaining
years to peace and
reconciliation one day
at a time.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Martin Seemungal
in Olievenhoutbosch Township
near Pretoria,
South Africa.
GWEN IFILL: Tomorrow, as part of
our yearlong
series Race Matters: Solutions,
special correspondent
Charlayne Hunter-Gault reports
on similar
reconciliation efforts here at
home, in Birmingham,
Alabama.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally: A little
more than
a week away, the Academy Awards
recognize
the many elements both seen and
unseen that
go into filmmaking.
One of those is the musical
score.
Jeffrey Brown visited
Oscar-nominated film
composer Carter Burwell recently
in his New
York studio to see how he
creates the soundtracks
to the movies.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's one of the
elements of
film that often goes unnoticed,
unless it's
very bad, or, in the case of
"Carol," very
good, the musical score.
CARTER BURWELL, Composer: You
know, I think
of that theme as being about the
heart-beating
excitement and mystery of seeing
someone and
feeling that tug.
JEFFREY BROWN: Carter Burwell
has been composing
music for movies for more than
30 years. And
for the first time, he's been
nominated for
an Oscar for his work on the
film directed
by Todd Haynes about two women
falling in
love in postwar America.
CARTER BURWELL: I don't want
there to be music
in the scene, or in the film,
just because
it's expected, I want it to be
there to say
something, and ideally to say
something that
you wouldn't otherwise -- that
wouldn't otherwise
be said.
You know, "Carol" is a perfect
example of
this, because it's very sparse
for dialogue
to begin with, and also it's a
love story
between two women at a time when
that actually
couldn't be spoken of openly.
JEFFREY BROWN: Literally
unspoken.
CARTER BURWELL: Literally
unspoken. And the
music is saying a lot that the
characters
either can't or won't say.
JEFFREY BROWN: A one-time
architecture student
and punk rocker, Burwell has
composed music
for more than 80 films,
beginning with the
Coen brothers' "Blood Simple" in
1984.
Since then, he's done most of
their major
films, including the
just-released "Hail,
Caesar!." He's also worked on
commercial giants,
like the "Twilight" saga, and
this year composed
music for the Oscar-nominated
stop-motion
picture "Anomalisa."
Burwell often begins by reading
a script to
determine, with the director,
what kind of
music, if any, might be
appropriate.
CARTER BURWELL: If it is early
in the process,
we can have a conversation that
at least suggests
what type of instrumentation
there might be.
In other words, how expensive
might this music
be? Is there going to be a
symphony orchestra?
Is it going to be a guy with a
ukulele?
JEFFREY BROWN: Wait a minute. So
that's the
first thing, is how expensive it
is, not the
-- what are we looking for here,
what kind
of sound, what kind of...
CARTER BURWELL: Well, you know,
they go hand
in hand, but, early on,
honestly, figuring
out the budget is -- especially,
you know,
I work on a lot of low-budget
films, and squeezing
everything and fitting it as
tightly as you
can is important.
JEFFREY BROWN: He doesn't begin
writing music
until he watches early cuts of
the scenes,
using visual cues, the look the
director is
after, to determine his musical
ones.
In the case of "Carol," he
created individual
instrumental voices, both
woodwinds, for the
two women.
CARTER BURWELL: I thought they
would be capable
of the fluidity that would seem
feminine,
and also appropriate to the look
of the film.
JEFFREY BROWN: This is before we
have even
met the two women in the film.
Right?
CARTER BURWELL: Exactly, right.
JEFFREY BROWN: So you have
introduced the
characters.
CARTER BURWELL: That's right. I
have introduced
-- that's right, exactly.
JEFFREY BROWN: Another example,
this time
with the piano filling in the
dialogue, comes
in a key scene in which the two
women drive
to "Carol"'s house.
CARTER BURWELL: The left hand of
the piano
is playing a rhythm, but it goes
into these
echoes that pile up and pile up,
so that you
kind of lose the rhythm. The
right hand of
the piano is different. It's
crystal-clear,
and sort of pointillistic, and
very simple.
JEFFREY BROWN: And we're inside
a different
universe now, right, in the car.
CARTER BURWELL: Exactly, and the
way it's
shot, it gets more and more
subjective. It's
just a little fur, a glove,
something like
that.
JEFFREY BROWN: With "Carol,"
Burwell had eight
weeks to craft the music, but,
in this world,
even that is longer than usual.
CARTER BURWELL: It's deadline
composing. That's
-- there are a lot of qualities
that maybe
make you a film composer, but
dealing with
deadlines and that kind of
stress is certainly
an essential one.
JEFFREY BROWN: Another key to
this aspect
of filmmaking, Burwell says, is
to think of
music like any other tool of
storytelling.
CARTER BURWELL: As a viewer and
listener,
I prefer to be a little less
informed. I prefer
that feeling of discomfort and
uncertainty
about, I'm not sure what's going
on. I -- what's
happening here in this scene?
Music, no matter what specific
thing it's
saying, it does lend a certain
emotional comfort.
And if you withhold that --
like, the perfect
example is the movie "No Country
For Old Men."
We realized that whenever we put
anything
that sounded like music in the
movie, the
tension evaporated, or lessened
anyway. And
that movie's all tension.
JEFFREY BROWN: You have done
scores for 80
or 90 films.
CARTER BURWELL: Apparently.
JEFFREY BROWN: Apparently, yes.
Never won
an Oscar.
CARTER BURWELL: Apparently.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: So, are you
anticipating, excited
by, or trying to stay away from
the whole
thing, or what?
CARTER BURWELL: You know, I love
this work,
and I have great admiration for
my -- you
know, my peers.
But it's also not -- the
industry is not -- mainstream
awards are not the most
important thing to
me. But I think it's great. No,
keep your
Oscar.
(LAUGHTER)
CARTER BURWELL: No, I'm looking
forward to
it. It will be -- it's going to
be fun.
JEFFREY BROWN: Carter Burwell,
congratulations,
and good luck, and thank you.
CARTER BURWELL: Well, thanks a
lot.
JEFFREY BROWN: From Lower
Manhattan, I'm Jeffrey
Brown for the "PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Later tonight on
"NOVA": New
technology is revealing insights
about the
iceman Otzi, the frozen,
preserved mummy discovered
in the Alps in 1991. In "Iceman
Reborn," scientists
are trying to unlock secrets
from his genetic
code to discover his true origin
and help
researchers understand how
people lived at
the end of the Stone Age.
That's tonight on most PBS
stations.
GWEN IFILL: And that's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Thursday: Making Sense of
gambling on the
presidential election, and who's
taking bets.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.